# Washington State EV Analysis project
Group members: Emerie Tattersall, Liam McBride

[Colab link](EV_Visualizations.ipynb)

## Report
For this project we chose to examine Washington State (WA) and its electric vehicles (EVs), specifically the vehicle population and infrastructure, in relation to landmark legislation regarding EVs. The two questions we are trying to answer are if these landmark legislations positively correlate with a higher growth rate in EV population, and higher growth rate in infrastructure (EV chargers). We chose one dataset to answer each question. The dataset for EVs includes information about each EV registered in WA, such as year, make, model, and county/city. The second dataset has the location of every EV charging station in WA and when it was established. The most important pieces of data from each dataset are the dates, as we need this information to cross reference with the dates of landmark legislation events. Using the dates of each event, we can see if there is an increase in growth rate for EV population and infrastructure. Regarding the legislation, the original 2008 EV tax incentives had caps for each manufacturer. This means that incentives were gradually lessened and made unavailable when an automaker sold more than 200,000 vehicles. This should result in a slow decline as eventually all manufacturers hit that limit. Subsequent legislation in 2021 and 2022 had no such limit. 

Preparing the data posed some challenges, specifically for the EV charging stations dataset. The website it was obtained from output a GeoJSON file as opposed to a CSV file like with the EV dataset. This meant it took extra steps and different pieces of code to parse the datasets and clean them of information not pertinent to the questions of our project. To analyze the information, we had to extract the year each EV charger was installed, and the year of the EV in the registry dataset. This was accomplished using read_csv’s usecols and read_file’s columns which needed to be specified directly in a string rather than using a column index like with a CSV. Another difficulty with both datasets was the lack of information prior to 2016 (both datasets) and after 2023 (chargers). As a result we omitted legislation prior to 2016. Legislation from the Trump administration that negatively impacted EV initiatives wouldn’t be as conclusive because the dataset that represented EV infrastructure (chargers) would have to be omitted past 2023, which we predicted would’ve shown a decline in growth rates. As a result, the visualization will center on 2016 through 2023 for both datasets, with EVs extending to 2025.

<iframe src="EV_Visualizations.html" width="100%" height="600" style="border:none;"></iframe>

Our analysis was based on the above visualization that we created. It shows the growth rate per year, and by hovering over each point, would also show the actual number of EVs and chargers built during that year. By far the most interesting year was 2021, with a 70.3% growth rate in EVs, and 241.4% in chargers. However, both would begin to decline after this year. The number of chargers plummeted in 2022 while EVs slowly moved into a negative growth rate by 2025.

Unfortunately the data does not go back far enough to give us meaningful information about the impact of Obama-era legislation. We could say that the stagnation between the years of 2017-2019 is a result of manufacturers hitting their eligibility limits for the tax credits, but that is purely speculation. What is absolutely clear Biden-era legislation. 2021 was the year of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and its effects are immediately obvious. Chargers and Vehicles had a large spike in growth, and that growth stayed strong for vehicles for the next two years. The reason that the rate of growth for chargers didn't remain high can be attributed to the fact that they are pieces of infrastructure rather than consumer goods. The average length of vehicle ownership is five years or less for nearly two-thirds of Americans, so cars are constantly being purchased. Whereas chargers are a one and done sort of deal that serve large areas and dont need replacement. By 2024 we see the rate of growth for EVs fall off as well. It could be argued that many of the people who wanted an EV bought one or it could be a result of some economic conditions. 
